#summary Tutorial for using JPrIME-VMCMC.

*VMCMC has not yet been released, and the information below is not guaranteed to be up-to-date. Feedback is much appreciated, should you want to try VMCMC out. We hope to be able offer a stable first release in a near future.*

= Introduction =

VMCMC is an application for analyzing output of MCMC chains. It deals with various metrics for assessing MCMC convergence, as well as summary statistics of inferred real-valued parameters, tree topologies, etc. VMCMC can be used with output from the C++ version of PrIME, and general tab-delimited files such as those produced by JPrIME applications [DLRS Delirious] or [DLTRS Deleterious]. 

VMCMC supports two modes for analyzing an MCMC chain:
  # Graphical user interface (GUI) for showing trace plots, etc.
  # Command-line summary of important statistics.

= Running =
 
You start the GUI version of VMCMC by running e.g.:
{{{
java -cp myfolder/jprime-x.y.z.jar se/cbb/jprime/apps/vmcmc/MCMCApplication
}}}
where the details of course refer to your current setup. You can always show all available options by typing e.g.:
{{{
java -cp myfolder/jprime-x.y.z.jar se/cbb/jprime/apps/vmcmc/MCMCApplication -h
}}}
If you run out of memory when using Oracle's HotSpot Java VM, you can allocate more memory by specifying e.g. (these are not options of VMCMC):
{{{
java -Xms768m -Xmx1536m -cp myfolder/jprime-x.y.z.jar se/cbb/jprime/apps/vmcmc/MCMCApplication
}}}
To initialize the GUI directly for a specific file, type e.g.:
{{{
java -cp myfolder/jprime-x.y.z.jar se/cbb/jprime/apps/vmcmc/MCMCApplication -f myfile.mcmc
}}}
To suppress the GUI and only output summary statistics of the chain in the terminal, typ e.g.:
{{{
java -cp myfolder/jprime-x.y.z.jar se/cbb/jprime/apps/vmcmc/MCMCApplication -f myfile.mcmc -n
}}}

= Details =

_To be announced._